Hi everybody. It's nice to see your
faces. Nice to see the meet the clan who
is interested in the things that the
presenters are interested in. Uh I've
short introduction. I've made my living
as a university professor in Ohio. Uh I
taught in the department of philosophy
and religious studies at Young Sound
State. I taught in religious studies,
Eastern religion, psychology of
mysticism, comparative spirituality,
Eastern thought. But what brings me here
today is not that work but is my work
with psychedelics which basically I did
for 20 years while I was an academic but
I wasn't really allowed to speak about
those things in the academic environment
and it was only after I retired that I
was able to write a book that I'd like
to speak from today. Now let me see if I
can get this working correctly. This is
a book that I published at the end of
last year. It's the book I'd like to
speak from today. It tells the story of
where I went over 20 years of working
with LSD. I followed a protocol
established by Stan Grath working in
psychedelic therapy which is totally
isolated the conventional sort of
therapeutic environment totally isolated
working with headphones and eye shades
and music and all those traditional
trappings except that I worked with very
high doses. I did 73 sessions over 20
years working with between 500 and 600
micrograms. I don't recommend this
protocol. I wouldn't do it the same way
if I were starting over again, but
that's what I did. And this is the
story. When someone asks me what's it
like taking that doses of LSD that's
high, I say it's it's like being in the
middle of a nuclear explosion. It just
completely shatters all the dimensions
of your mind and the boundaries of
consciousness. And if you keep this up
for long periods of time, it reveals
levels of reality that lie beyond time
space reality. It is like this nuclear
explosion which as it pushes higher into
the atmosphere. It takes levels of the
atmosphere that are invisible and makes
them visible. When you work
systematically with psychedelics,
whether it's in indigenous context or in
contemporary contexts, you basically go
through a process that reveals levels of
existence that lie beyond your ordinary
sensory experience.
Very briefly in the book, I tell the
story of the levels of consciousness
that I went through in this process,
going through a series of death and
rebirth experiences.
A series that took place at first the
personal level of mind where one is
dealing with personal issues eventually
going through ego death and then at the
collective level of mind where you're
engaging deep structures within the
collective psyche.
Third, the archetypal dimension of mind
going beyond time space reality entering
into being dissolved into some of the
archetypal structures that underly
physical existence.
Fourth, going into causal level reality,
causal oneness. And finally entering for
me entering into what I call the diamond
luminosity. What Buddhism calls uh
dharmicaya are the abs the clear light
of absolute reality.
Making a transition from one level to
another involves going through a series
of deaths and rebirth. It's not simply
ego death. It's going through a a a
death that takes place at the collective
level. deaths that take place at the
archetypal level and so on and so so
forth entering into deeper intimacy with
the universe. Now that's all the slides
I wanted to share. Let me see if I can
get out of that.
All right. Such a long journey, so many
years, so many levels of consciousness,
it's impossible for me to summarize them
very succinctly. But for today's
presentation, I simply wanted to focus
on two aspects of this story which I
think are relevant to this discussion of
the relationship between consciousness
and the exploration of consciousness and
building the regenerative society. The
first issue has to do with something
that happened in the collective level of
mind and the second has to do with what
I call the birth of the future human.
After I had gone through ego death,
after I had worked for a couple of years
and had gone through a number of
different ego death experiences, I
entered a domain that involved large
quantities of vast territories of
collective suffering. A domain that I
call the ocean of suffering. It
eventually expanded over two years to
encompass hundreds of thousands of
beings of persons and thousands of years
of time. And this was confusing to me at
first because I did this work like many
people working with psychedelics
thinking that I was doing this work for
my personal benefit that I was doing it
um to heal myself to enlighten myself to
accelerate my own spiritual development.
But it was always kind of self or
self-referencing.
What I found was that this ocean of
suffering went on for so long and it was
so challenging and involved so many
thousands of people that eventually it
shattered the very model that I had
brought to working with psychedelics.
And I abandoned what I would call the
individual model of transformation and I
adopted a collective model of
transformation.
That is I believe that what I was doing
when I entered into the ocean of
suffering was actually being used or
facilitating a healing that was not
focused in my personal life or my
personal soul even but it was focused on
the collective psyche of humanity. that
something was using my sessions to drain
toxins that live in the human psyche
that are the residue of unresolved
trauma from thousands and thousands of
years of war uh and the terrible things
that we've done to each other through
history.
Eventually um this work culminated in an
orgy of cleansing and purification and
healing and I was jettisoned from there
on into archetypal reality and I never
returned into the ocean of suffering.
My point from this to keep it very
short. My point is everything we do when
we are working in deep states of
consciousness not only affects our
personal being but it affects the beings
of those around us. It affects those who
are immediately around us in our system
of social relationships.
Some of my work affected my students for
example without them knowing what I was
doing. But it also reaches deeper than
that. It reaches deep into the fiber of
the collective psyche of humanity. And I
think when we work in deep non-ordinary
states, we are if we choose to do it, if
we choose to allow this to happen or if
it is our karma for this to happen, we
go through processes. We do things which
allow us to facilitate a direct
um healing a direct transformation of
our species as a whole of our deep
family. There is no private self in the
world. We are part of a species. Our
species is part of the ecosystem of
earth and earth is part of the galaxy
and so on and so forth. And when we do
this work conscientiously, we are given
opportunities to bring about a
transformation which I think extends far
beyond our personal life and far beyond
our moment in time.
Now perhaps because of this very strong
collective orientation in my work uh
something else began to happen over the
course of the 20 years that I was doing
this work. I began to experience a
series of visions about the human
trajectory of evolution, about where
evolution was taking humanity, where we
were, what was happening in the larger
scheme of things. I entered repeatedly a
state of consciousness that I would
describe as deep time. Deep time is not
eternity. It isn't timelessness. It's a
it's a condition of time in which you
can experience hundreds of years or even
thousands and tens of thousands of years
in a very compressed time frame
sometimes as a simultaneous now. I
entered into deep time slowly personally
with my own personal deep time and then
I entered from there into collective
deep time in which I was given teachings
about where humanity was in its
evolution and what was happening and
where we were going.
There is a chapter in the book called
the birth of the future human and the
focus of these visions was that humanity
was coming into a a culmination point.
They were coming we were coming into a
before and after point a turning point a
critical transformation that involved
the entire human family.
What was emphasized was that the
creative intelligence of the universe
was not simply trying to awaken
individuals. It's almost as if the age
of individual enlightenment was over.
But the creative intelligence was
actually trying to awaken the entire
human species and that we were poised on
the cusp of a profound transformation of
the human condition. a a transformation
that would change not only our economy
and our ecological values and our social
orientation. It would reach so deep that
it would actually change the bedrock of
the human psyche. It would change the
fundamental archetypal blueprint of the
human psyche. That that in my
understanding is that is our hour of
history. That is what's happening. That
is what we are entering. The visions
that I had for this, I did this work
between 1979 and 1999.
So when I when this was taking place,
this is 30 to 25 years ago in which I
was experiencing these things.
And in one critical series of sessions,
I was taken deep into humanity's future
and I experienced the death and rebirth
of humanity.
All mystics tell us we we learn from the
mystical traditions that before great
awakening there takes place a great
death. Before the awakening of mystical
oneness we experience the dark night of
the soul. Humanity as a whole was
entering the dark night of the soul of
its soul which is a time of intense
purification a contration
with our historical karma with the
limitations that we have created and
lived with in in history. And in this
series of sessions I went deep into the
future and I experienced the complete
collapse of civilization as we know it.
just a profound implosion that seemed to
be driven by an ecological crisis, but
an ecological crisis that was so deep
that it triggered a global systems
disintegration
uh at our collective level. And just at
the depth of this death process
when it looked like it was going to be
an extinction event, I experienced that
the worst of the problem. It was like a
storm passing over a hurricane passing
over a Pacific island. The storm passed
and the survivors began to get up and
pick themselves up and began to begin a
new. And when they began to knew they
were different human beings, that a
transformation took place in the depth
of this death and rebirth process in
which we let go fundamental beliefs and
values and patterns of our past. And we
engage the future as different human
beings with an expanded heart, a
profound innate sense of the oneness of
existence and our oneness with other
human beings. A profound a deeper
transparency to the mind of the universe
as a whole.
This truly was a before and after point
in time.
It took me literally years to recover
from the tremendous time expansion and
this encounter with this in at the one
hand awesome and at the other hand very
challenging and very difficult
confrontation with the human story or
extension of the human story. But this
has been the reality that I've lived
with ever since. It's been the reality
that I understand what is taking place
in history today. It's been the reality
that basically is my background to
confronting the COVID 19 crisis, the
pandemic, which I see as simply just an
overture to a much series of of
punctuated historical crises that lie
ahead for us in the 21st century. And I
think there is a correlation between
what's happening in the outer world and
what's happening in the inner world.
that as the at the outer world as we are
trying to become one planet an
integrated planet with an integrated
citizenry and a healthy planet that
external drive to oneness is being
mirrored in an internal drive to oneness
which involves I think an integration of
the soul into time space reality and by
the soul I mean the consciousness that
holds all the experiences of all of our
former lives. I think basically our
consciousness of all of our former lives
is coming together and fusing. And when
they fuse, it creates a higher form of
consciousness which really I think is
the new platform of humanity in future
time.
Now I'm think I'm probably close to the
end of my time. I know I've thrown a lot
of large ideas out there, so I'll just
stop there and um see where we take
this.
>> Christopher, that was wonderful. Thank
you so much for sharing. Yeah, I really
love your work and I love your your
vision and um it's kind of um yeah, I
mean extraordinary uh to talk with
somebody who has, you know, explored the
sort of depth dimensions of the LSD
space, you know, perhaps as as much as
anybody alive right now. Um, I'm kind of
curious what what's your perspective on
LSD? I mean, do do you have any
perspective on what it is in in this in
this exploration? Is it itself a um, you
know, is there an entities attached to
it? Is is it a being? Is it is it just a
chemical catalyst? Is it here
accidentally? Is there some kind of
intentionality to it?
Well, given the synchronicity of the
birth of the atomic bomb and the birth
of LSD in the same decade, I don't think
it's an accident that it's here. I
understand it to be an amplifier and a
catalyst of consciousness. Similar to S
is psilocybin and Iasa and DMT and 5met
each of these are fundamental catalyst
of consciousness. Each of them have
their own distinctive characteristics.
One of the things I think which is
different about LSD is it's relatively
new and therefore it humanity doesn't
have a lot of history with it. I my
sense is that when we do Iwasa and when
we do psilocybin we don't only
experience the physiological absorption
of this chemical into our biophysiology
but we also engage the fields which have
been fields of consciousness which have
been created by all the beings who have
worked with this substance through
through time. So because we've been
using psilocybin for thousands of years
and we've been using iawasa for
thousands of years, there are very
strong feels associated with these
substances that we encounter when we use
these substances. LSD is a relatively
young uh substance and therefore I
experience it being unusually clean in
this respect. I did not experience much
of a cultural overlay, much of an
historical overlay. It seems to be
particularly clean and I experience it
as and remember I was working at high
levels higher levels than I recommend
500 to 600 micrograms.
It has a tendency to drive to the high
ceiling of high cosmological ceiling.
Psilocybin is much more body grounded.
It the states of consciousness that
awakens are much more kind of closer to
where we live in our body. LSD isn't
necessarily so. So at lower doses, yes,
but in higher doses, it tends to dry
drive high into the cosmology.
>> I'm also kind of curious. I think you
you seem like you have a bit of a
Buddhist orientation also. Am I correct
in that?
>> That's true. Yeah.
>> You mentioned reincarnation in past
lives. I'm kind of curious if you have a
um insight into what that means. I mean,
I got very excited by EMTT Kwami's book.
I think it was called the self-aware
universe.
Kosami is a quantum physicist who was um
I believe working at Institute of Noetic
Sciences. He and he began to look at how
um quantum physics action at a distance
could kind of provide a um you know at
least you know starting point for
scientific hypothesis around how there
might be kind of an aggregate kind of a
quantum aggregate of uh you know feeling
willing thinking that somehow continues
connected you know after after the
physical death and kind of seeks to
reagregate to continue some process
towards maybe the ultimate goal you
know, unification or realization or
enlightenment. I I don't know if you had
any any thoughts in those regards
regards. I
>> I do. Reincarnation is a fundamental
part of my worldview. The first book I
wrote is a book on reincarnation life
cycles and it discusses the empirical
evidence. As a philosopher, I believe
that the phys the evidence, the
scientific evidence for reincarnation
now is overwhelming. We have
extraordinary number of cases. Ian
Stevenson's work with young children at
the University of Virginia basically
established the empirical database uh
for justifying a belief in
reincarnation. Now that doesn't mean we
understand the physics of it. There's so
much we still don't understand about it.
But a fundamental principle that I take
away from Stevenson's work and all the
work done by past life therapist u in
the psycho psychotherrapeutic community
is that nature retains its learning.
Nature holds on to its learning. My
understanding is that reincarnation is
the higher octave of evolution. So in
evolution, we find that nature folds
forward the learning of groups. In
reincarnation, nature has found a way of
folding forward in time the learning of
individuals.
Now I think eventually lifetime after
lifetime after lifetime, we're learning
more. We're we're we're becoming more.
We're acquiring more skills. We're
activating more potentials that are
latent within our structure. Sooner or
later, sooner or later, I believe all of
our reincarnational history becomes
integrated into a higher order of
intelligence. I've experienced this in
my sessions where all of my former lives
came together and they came together and
they fused. And when they fused, there
was an enormous explosion of of energy
of diamond light broke out of my chest
and it shot me into a state of
consciousness in which I was an
individual, but I was an individual
beyond any frame of reference I had
previously known.
>> Uh we had a question from um Diana.
Uh she's curious to know your thoughts
and experience on people getting to
these places of insight, integration,
and deep time without the use of
mindaltering drugs or plant medicines.
>> Absolutely. I've had many people write
me since this book has been published
and they say, "I understand what you're
talking about. I've had experiences
similar to what you're describing, but
I've never done psychedelics. I'm a
lifelong meditator. I've had these
experiences under medit with
meditation." And I think that's
absolutely true. If LSD is an amplifier
of consciousness, it is consciousness
that does the work. And there are many
ways of intensifying and amplifying
consciousness. We know many of the
forms. LSD or psychedelics is simply
another form, another key to working
with consciousness, but it's
consciousness that does the work.
>> Yeah.
And what kind of uh since you've had
these insights into kind of the future,
although didn't didn't exactly seem like
you had an exact time frame, but I
remember in uh Dark Knight, Early Dawn,
you kind of said it was going to be a
very compressed period uh when
civilization began to crack apart and
these kind of um emergent new properties
of the new human, you know, kind of
began to integrate together. Um you
know, what what you know, well, maybe
that's not that's what I remember, but
you tell me if I'm wrong. Uh but then
also I'm curious like you know how would
you ground that into like practical
advice for people in this time? Is there
you know you know is doing these
psychedelic explorations a form a way to
prepare oneself for for what's coming?
Uh you know is there a way we can
minimize the destructive uh impacts of
what's coming? Uh because it definitely
feels like there's a bit of a of a
destructive uh express train heading our
way right now. there is it's kind of a
kie destroyer in order to make room for
the new. I think there are many things
we can do. I I think basically
collectively we're facing our collective
shadow and that collective shadow is a
shadow that all of us have personally
had a hand in creating in the sense that
we have lived through history and
therefore we have been part of our
history and this this kind of
confrontation with the collector's
shadow is part of our common work. Now I
think one of the ways in which we can
consciously participate in this process
is first by understanding what's taking
place. And you're right, I wasn't given
any specific details of date. I wasn't
given any details of exactly how, when,
and where this was going to take place.
I was given experiences of this of this
meltdown not as an individual would
experience but but literally as the
human species as a whole would
experience it. And I think the one of
the key things we can do is basically
take responsible for responsibility for
our own shadow to do whatever
psychotherrapeutic work, psychedelic
work, meditational work, spiritual work
to basically help us confront the con
the the shadow dimensions of our own
being in order to dissolve those and let
light in where previously darkness had
reigned. But then at another level, we
can collectively participate and help
others in confronting the shadow of our
culture, the shadow of history. That's
the kind of political action side, the
social action side.
>> Beautiful, Christopher. I love it. I
think that it would be great to have
David Luke come on and speak for a bit
and then maybe have a little bit of a
dialogue uh after. So David, if you are
there, if you want to jump in.
>> Yeah, sure. Hi. Can you hear me? Okay.
>> Yep.
>> Oh, great. Yeah, good to be here. Thanks
for inviting me along. Good to see
everybody. Thanks for that, Chris.
Fantastic as ever to hear you talk. Uh,
so I'll just give you a little bit of
background about me. And, um, I'm going
to give you kind of pricey of what I've
been doing for the last few decades or
what the insights I've I've kind of come
to. So, I'm a psychologist. uh by
training primarily parasychologist,
transpersonal psychologist and um my
kind of big umbrella area of of of
interest is kind of altered states of
consciousness and anomalous or
transpersonal experiences. Uh so I've
done a lot of research on all kinds of
altered states. I do a lot of research
specifically with psychedelics. Uh I do
a lot of research when I'm I'm not on
psychedelics as well, but it's not as
much fun. uh and so I'm going to give
you kind of a bit of an overview of some
of the insights I've had that come from
the research but also my own particular
journey as well. So insights that are
coming from the research and what the
journey involves uh and what it leads
to. You could pretty much sum up the
kind of the where we are currently with
our kind of intellectual quest by
suggesting that psychedelics and altered
states in general because I think all al
states have a have a kind of continuity
with with psychedelic experiences just
perhaps the volumes turned up more with
psychedelic experiences is they increase
connectivity and they increase
connectivity across the whole kind of
spectrum of of experience from the
biological through the psychological the
sociological the eological ical and even
into the cosmological or spiritual
realms perhaps. Uh so on a biological
level we know from research at Imperial
College for instance they increase
connectivity within different brain
regions. So areas of your brain which
don't normally communicate with each
other suddenly become very
communicative. They have
hyperconnectivity
and on a kind of cognitive level this
explains things like synthesia,
divergent thinking and increased
creativity, cognitive flexibility and
and so on. On a psychological level,
they connect us with ourselves. So they
give us access to our unconscious
material. Uh tap straight into that your
shadow as Chris said, your personal
history, your past traumas and so on.
And hopefully through a kind of
assistance or through being guided
through that journey, you can come to
some kind of resolution of your prior
traumas. I just found a brilliant quote
by Gaba Mate about half an hour ago
which says every human being has a true
genuine authentic self and the trauma is
the disconnection from it and the
healing is the reconnection with it and
uh we know that this results in a kind
of enhanced mood well-being and enhanced
mindfulness from a psych psychological
scientific perspective on a sociological
level uh psychedelics and old states can
help us connect increase our connection
to each other. They can increase our
openness to experience, our willingness
to engage with, you know, culture and
art and different perspectives. They
increase our empathy. They increase
compassion. And this can lead to an
increase in pro-social behavior uh and
enhanced value orientations.
uh this is where my own particular area
of research has been kind of deep diving
more recently is into the ecological
perspective on that level and that we
find that these states of consciousness
can increase our connection to nature
which I think is kind of pretty vital
right now. Uh so we have an increase in
eco-consciousness or biophilia
interspecies communications or
interspecies connections also increase
and this has a conccomant knock-on
effect of uh increases in ecologically
orientated behavior. Uh so from a big
survey I conducted, we found that of the
people who taken psychedelics, they said
their psychedelic experiences in the
majority had made them change their
diet, become more raw, more vegan, more
local, uh more ve vegetarian. Uh it also
increased in the majority of the sample
the amount of gardening they do, which
is a massive take-home news headline
there. Psychedelics increase gardening.
This is big news, everybody. Um and they
can also increase people's ecological
activism and even people change their
career as a result of their uh
psychedelic experiences. And then so we
go beyond the environment and the
ecosystem and the biosphere into the
cosmological levels as well. We find
that people have a a greater sense of
connection to the universe, God, uh the
other, whatever it might be, uh into the
realms of transpersonal and mystical
experiences which have the knock-on
effect of helping people reduce their
fear of da death, enhancing
spirituality, enhancing their sense of
purpose and meaning, uh uh increasing
self-trcendence. And we find in the
clinical research with psychedelics that
those people uh who have had a mystical
experience by the kind of standard
psychological measures uh are the ones
that have the best clinical outcomes in
terms of dealing with addictions uh
fighting depression, anxiety or even end
of life fears.
So all of that is encapsulated within
this kind of notion of of course we need
the appropriate set setting and
substance and the preparation and
integration to bookend it. So there's
some kind of insights about where we are
with the research currently insights
directly from the journey. Uh I think
I'm going to give over a few points
here. One of which is I think the the
psychonautore and scientist John Lily
best encapsulated this for me and that
is that he had this famous dictim which
is in the province of the mind what one
believes to be true is either true or
becomes true within certain limits.
These limits are to be found
experimentally i.e through science and
experientially so through personal
endeavor and when these are found they
just turn out to be more beliefs to be
transcended in the problems of the mind
there are no limits he did add on a
little addendum to that however after a
few near-death experiences pushing his
physical body to the limits and he said
however in the problems of the body
there are certain limits not to be
transcended but in the problems to the
mind is limitless so this kind of gives
off two other kind of interesting points
and avenues is that what the first one
is that beliefs are our reality. Our
reality is only constrained by our
beliefs. Uh but there's a danger in that
as well because they can our beliefs can
also be prisons. Our our convictions can
make us convicts. Um, and we know that
because of all the kind of psychological
rabbit holes we can fall down, such as
confirmation bias, whereby our beliefs
prescribe the kind of things and
information that we're willing to accept
or even look for in the first place, and
we just end up bootstrapping our own
dogmas and belief systems. Um and we see
this kind of kind of transposed into
into science and the endeavor of of the
research of consciousness where you know
the the kind of the academy and the
scientific endeavor is pretty much
constrained by its a priory dogmatic
kind of um reliance on materialist
reductionism. this kind of neuror
reductionist perspective on on
physicalism and this view that the human
organism and consciousness itself is is
merely just a mechanistic process and
that consciousness and and life is is
kind of devoid of any kind of real
sentience or or life for that matter. So
and how that translates is this these
kind of limiting beliefs therefore
constrain the kind of questions that
scientists even ask in the first place.
So they only ask questions which tend to
support these kind of prior dogmatic
belief systems about the material nature
of the universe and therefore you know
fields of research like transpersonal
psychology and parasychology don't
receive any funding and so we we we
don't just kind of get a big enough
voice in the kind of dominant paradigm
and worldview. So I'm basically making
an argument for agnosticism and
plurality plurality that we should have
a you know we should be open to many
many worldviews and perspectives and and
and try not to believe anything
particularly you know just to just
beware be wary of beliefs in general and
that's kind of quite useful in this era
of apparent fake news um you know
post-truth era I mean I think we've
always been in a post-truth era since
you know the dawn of communication uh
because we in nature that nature is
constantly using deception for its own
particular survival. So, you know,
there's never been such a thing as real
news, right? Or true news. But I think
it's good to to kind of take an agnostic
position and a plurality and and not get
too hooked on any particular belief
system. The other dictim I think that
comes out of John Lily's famous uh
sentence is that the mind is infinite.
Okay. So I mean and we can see that as
apparent from uh you know evidence from
genius, inspiration, creativity along
with the findings of things like
parasychology which show that you know
it by the empirical evidence standards
of today there is I think there's very
we can talk to Dean Raiden about this.
there's a very little room to to to
consider that the evidence is not
substantial enough to posit the idea
that we can transcend time and space and
access any point of time and space with
our mind. Um, and I think Chris would
probably back that up with his various
LSD sessions. And I think the research
and theory in physics is beginning to
look more like parasychology all the
time. uh there's an increasing
conceptual confluence of both the
fundamental quantities and forces of
physics with consciousness. You know,
time is now considered to be somewhat
time subjective human experience of time
is is considered to be illusurary and
things like precognition become more and
more possible all the time. And then
finally my final point is then
everything is connected. Um that's one
thing of parasychology and psychedelics
and transpersonal psychology has shown
us that everything is connected. We can
transcend time and space. We know that
from the evidence from precognition
telepathy uh clairvoyance
synchronicities and so on. Although that
is circumscribed by point two, you know
that's circumscribed by our beliefs and
the limitations of our beliefs. And as a
result of that, we should act with
openness, uh, transparency in everything
that we do, with compassion and with a
spirit of reciprocity,
uh, and so that we kind of start to move
away from all kinds of isms, including
the ones that aren't given much uh, air
time these days. You know, things like
ethnosentricism, but also species
centricism, stepping outside the box of
thinking we're at the top of the of the
food chain, and even cognentricism. So
that is the view that you know only one
state of consciousness is valued in our
current society. I think we need to be
more pluralistic and value everything
from dreams to meditation to
psychedelics and so on. And that takes
us back to the beginning is that these
old states of consciousness can help us
move towards increased connectivity. So
that's it.
>> David, that was awesome. Thank you so
much. And yeah, the work you're doing is
tremendous. Um yeah, I guess I'm I'm
curious a little bit about uh you know
what what you what you wrote about in
the book about extraordinary experiences
kind of like you know the psychic and
the paranormal um experiences that are
so common uh in psychedelic states and
what that kind of reveals about um
consciousness uh in in your perspective.
Yeah, I I think I think it it poses an
enormous question mark against the idea
that you know brain or that
consciousness is confined to the brain,
right? I mean, we already have kind of
135 years of evidence from parasychology
that, you know, psychic abilities and
the transcendence of time and space have
some really good evidence to back it up.
It's not an everyday experience, but it
happens to enough people enough times
and under control laboratory situations
that we can say, okay, there's this
ability to transcend time and space. And
psychedelics pretty much just turn up
the volume on that. You know, people
have way more of these psychic
experiences, paranormal like
experiences, transpersonal experiences
with psychedelics. Uh, and I believe,
you know, a good proportion of those are
probably very genuine. Some of them may
be a bit delusional, but some of them
may be very genuine. And I think the
evidence is is moving towards that. Um
there hasn't been enough research done
on that. But we have you know thousands
of years of shamanic practice using
psychedelics and other states of
consciousness which is is for that very
purpose. And I think we need to spend
more time listening and communicating
with indigenous peoples who have this
animistic shamanistic world view and
what can be learned from that. So I
think we come to this point where you
know the cork is out of the genie
bottle. Now uh the academy is once more
exploring psychedelics in in a kind of
serious way. We can't deny that people
are having a large amount of these
transpersonal and even parasychological
paranormal like experiences and we
should openly investigate them in with
an open mind at face value rather than
just trying to explain them away.
Um
I guess uh what my understanding is that
psychic and paranormal effects are
extremely difficult to study under
normal traditional research methods.
I've heard for instance that um even
when an effect seems to be demonstrated
uh at first with repeat experiments it
seems that the correlation goes down
it's almost like um the secret you know
there's a secret that tries to protect
itself or that doesn't want to make
itself known to humanity at this point.
Well, you can ask Dean more about that.
Uh, I think, uh, there is a sense in
which a lot of the parasychology
experiments aren't immediately
repeatable, but when you stack them
together with meta analyses, you do find
this kind of highly significant data
set. When you take all the research
that's been done, you add it all
together and these results are kind of
highly compelling. Uh, there is a sense
in which some of the effects do reduce
over time, but they hit a plateau, you
know. So like the Gansfield studies have
have remained at a kind of 35% kind of
32% above Jan's you know uh figure
beyond this kind of initial decline. So
overall when you stack the data the
effects are actually there but in a way
um it's very hard to learn much about
them largely due to the complexity I
think of the factors involved. you know,
we're dealing with with kind of turning
a mirror on consciousness itself and it
becomes a very slippery endeavor. Um,
it's like uh we the some of the major
problems are we don't know where the
psychic abilities are coming from
theoretically because it could always
just be that the the experimental
themselves are exerting their their
psychic abilities, their pre-cognition,
whatever it is to try and get the
results they need. And so all I think we
need to take that very seriously because
it applies to the whole scientific
endeavor like for instance you know um
the Higs Bos and the discovery of the
the the CERN particle accelerator the
way that experiment's set up it's it's
kind of completely uh indistinguishable
really in in effect and size from the
global consciousness project right you
have lots and lots of people all
seemingly coming together in a kind of
concerted
uh focused consciousness trying to
affect this kind of random number
generator in a global consciousness
project and you get these hugely super
significant figures right uh whereas in
the Higs boson experiments you've got
all these physicists coming together
spending millions of pounds or dollars
even you know building this kind of mass
particle accelerator to try and find
something which they think exists and
all you get is a probabilistic outcome
right that it exists and it and it's no
more significant than the global
consciousness project. Um, so I'm not
sure where I was going with that, but I
leave that point there.
>> Uh, what about, um, you know, you were
talking about kind of the positive
ecological and psychological effects of
psychedelics. Then we have you know I
mean it's almost becomes you know c
certain ways of discussing psychedelics
have now kind of you know forged these
kind of like tracks in the collective
psyche like you know DMT you know like
if you smoke an NDMT or have a direct
experience of it the experience is so
incredibly alien um that um yeah how do
you how do you know what what do you
think about that? Do you think there's
any evidence that suggests many people
talk about having a sense of there being
entities or you know other dimensional
realities? I mean is it just the uh the
wiring of the brain being you know
totally re re reconnected or a
switchboard shifted or is you know is
there any evidence that there might be
some some other you know sort of
hyperdimensional reality that we that we
connect to in these states?
Well, I think that the question of DMT
is is super interesting and that one in
particular because it's the one most
reliable at giving people encounter
experiences with with some kind of
sentient entity which they believe most
of the time to be some kind of real
encounter. um there hasn't been enough
research done on it like I say for for
all the the reasons pointed out before
that you know the scientific endeavor
only looks to kind of bootstrap its own
belief systems by researching things it
can explain with neuroscience right uh
so you know there hasn't been much
virtually any research looking into the
nature of these DMT entities most of the
the data is coming from psychonauts and
and we see there are certain
commonalities you know certain people
tend to encounter you know like the
elves for for one are quite common or
these kind of totally dispassionate
beings which are kind of doing some kind
of neuroanatomy experiments on people
and extracting their emotions. That
seems to be a pretty common meme as
well. Uh but we can't ever really
separate out the cultural influences,
you know, in in in kind of examining
this this huge data of phenomenology.
But I think there are commonalities and
I think they need to be explored really
in in a more kind of concerted way. And
what I will say is, you know, some data
that came out of Johns Hopkins this
year, last year showed that of people
having entity encounter experiences with
with DMT of those who were atheists
prior to their experience, less than
half of them were still atheists after
their experience. So that, you know,
they're they're deeply profoundly
worldchanging experiences which tend to
lead people to believe that there is
some kind of genuine other there. Uh,
and it's, you know, it's it's going to
be a tricky kind of sticky wrestling
match with science to try and kind of
bring out any kind of empirical
validity on on the ontology of these
beings, I think. But it's worth the
wrestle.
David, I know in the uh book on
extraordinary experience, you were also
talking about how you can envision there
being in the future some type of
research uh institute uh into into
consciousness itself. Uh I mean that's
something that really fascinates me and
I think maybe with everything that's
happening and the sense of also the
ecological kind of doomcloud up ahead,
you know, maybe it's time to accelerate
um that, you know, and actually bring
that into manifestation. How would you
how would you construct such a thing? Do
you think it's it's possible that we we
could you know have our kind of Hogwarts
for you know consciousness you know deep
diving you know what what would that
consist of what type of you know
research would you want to see done
>> yeah I think that totally can and thanks
for that question Daniel and I think you
know we have to bring together all the
kind of perspectives on it you know so
it can't just be a purely kind science
medical model endeavor I think we need
psychiatrists and psychotherapists and
psychopharmarmacologists
for what we can learn about, you know,
the brain and all that kind of part of
the jigsaw puzzle. Uh, but we also need
to bring people from kind of wisdom
traditions in as well. So, you know,
kind of people from cultures like the
Woli, you know, have had thousands of
years of shimanic practice with with
substances like pyote and and kind of
really bring these together in one kind
of melting pot. Uh, and also kind of
wisdom traditions, you know, from from
the east as well. Um, so I think that's
what it'd have to look like and and I
think moving forward like you know if
psilocybin and other substances are
going to get licensed pretty much soon
for for treatment uh for depression and
so on and so forth. We're going to need
people who are more savvy with the kind
of transpersonal kind of experiences
that end of the spectrum. And I don't
just mean mystical experiences, but I
mean experiences of telepathy, entity
encounters, out of body experiences, all
these kind of things. People are going
to uh have to have some kind of better
understanding of of these experiences.
And I don't think we can leave that to
psychiatrists and neuroscientists really
to kind of just deal with, you know, and
I think people like shamans uh or
Tibetan Buddhist monks and people like
that need, we all need to sit around the
table together. So we need a kind of a
completely multinational
multid-disiplinary kind of center where
we can all share ideas and exchange.
>> Um I was hoping I I I hoping he'll still
pop up but one of one of the people I'd
invited to speak today and who was on a
roster is Sergio Mana uh who is a noal
shaman. I don't know if you know his
work at all. He he works in the dream
you know kind of the dream uh kind of
practices of the Aztecs and he wrote a
book called the age of the six son where
he kind of you know because I'd written
the book on 2012 and then you know
people were like oh the world didn't end
in 2012 and I was like well I never said
it was going to end in 2012 you know but
we're clearly in some type of shift u
you know Sergio Mana's perspective and
obviously this is not a scientifically
verifiable idea is that we are in a
transition from the fifth son to the
sixth sun which in the you know
Mesoamerican cosmology is a shift from a
son of light to a son of darkness. Uh
the sun of light for them is a period of
fascination with material technology,
rationality, science, logic. As you move
into the sun of darkness, it becomes
more of a psyche becomes more
predominant. The dream world becomes
more predominant. Reality becomes more
like a waking dream. and and I and I
feel that I find this a very fascinating
notion. Um I'm kind of curious how it
resonates with you. I also kind of um in
a way correlate it with the um
accelerating or you know kind of
popularity of psychedelics
uh and a sense that many more people are
kind of opening these doorways in
different ways right now and and maybe
that's somehow having a um a kind of um
effect you know on the collective psyche
that's um happening in a way that you
know is unpredictable. I I don't know
what your thoughts on that. I just
thought and maybe Christopher has some
ideas on that too.
>> Yeah, I'll just jump in. But I would say
yeah, I mean for sure this kind of
revival of uh psychedelic interest is is
going to have an effect on on the
collective consciousness certainly in
the in the west where it seems to be
happening first and foremost. But uh and
I think I think it can only be a good
thing if if we reconnect with this kind
of more dreamy associative kind of
region of our brain get into the
mythological and the unconscious kind of
side of things. you know, as Ian McGill
has has kind of very neatly kind of
described in his book um the master of
his explain Ian McGillchrist's idea for
those who don't know it.
>> So, you know, the idea of well, he kind
of takes a kind of more poetic than
literal stance, but also backed up with
some science on the nature of the left
brain and the right brain. the left
brain being the kind of the literal
logical linear linguistic kind of
approach to reality and experience and
and the right brain being more of this
kind of dreamlike associative
mythological
um uh uh you know endeavor right so and
that that we've confused the master with
the emissery right that the emissery is
the left brain the bit that does all the
communicating the mouth you know uh the
language and uh we've got to the point
where the emissery the the left brain
thinks it's the master. You know, we we
are kind of so heavily skewed towards
this kind of logical linear linguistic
mode of of being in the in the developed
world that we've completely ignored the
the the dream time, the imagination, the
associative thinking, the mythological
uh to our to our peril, right? You know,
it's like kind of our intelligence has
outstripped our wisdom in in many ways.
And this is kind of bringing us to this
kind of cataclysmic point, right? This
kind of moment of crisis. Uh and so we
can it it would really help us I think
to flip that back over and get these two
things in balance and I think yeah I
think psychedelics have a have a big
role to play in that and I think also
the internet and things like that. Uh
the dangers with the internet though
it's uh you can think of it as kind of
like the new sphere and it's kind of
like a a kind of technological
bootstrapping for our own kind of
clairvoyant telepathic abilities right
you know we can fake it till we make it
with with kind of telecommunications and
the internet and then we'll probably
come to realize that we can do all that
anyway uh hopefully but meanwhile we're
kind of sifting through an ocean of of
of detritus of misinformation. I'll let
Chris jump in.
Yeah, I think the analogy that I use for
this in Dark Night early dawn is the
analogy of the daytime sky and the
nighttime sky. We are like a culture
that basically had a rule that we have
to be behind closed doors by the time
the sun goes down and we're not allowed
to get out until the sun is up. So our
entire known world is from the nearby
close at hand brilliantly illuminated
sun soaked world. But think if we were a
culture like this, we've missed the
night sky. We just don't see the far
away the the greater context. And so we
don't have we can't answer questions of
cosmology. We can't answer questions of
origin because these are the types of
questions that require the depth which
are available only in the deepest levels
of consciousness where we can actually
experience the consciousness of the
universe which we have come to which we
are appreciating in the physical world.
But everything which is physical has a
conscious dimension to it. And so I
think that this balancing out, seeing
the nighttime sky of consciousness
really will have a huge impact on a
rebalancing of our of our worldview.
>> David, I'm curious also what kind of uh
from your research, you know, what would
you offer people in terms of uh you
know, kind of practical advice? I mean
uh do you think it's um kind of the
right time for people to explore these
um alternative dimensions of
consciousness through enthogens? Do you
think there are dangers in them? Um I I
guess another another question for you
which could be part of the same question
is is there a um do you do you also
recognize a dark side uh for both of you
actually in in psychedelic exploration?
>> Um you know is Yeah. So so be curious to
hear what you say. But I'd say, you
know, I think it's down to the
individual to determine whether it's
it's right for them. I don't necessarily
think psychedelics are for for
everybody. I think they can help a lot
of people uh in in lots of different
ways and but they're not necessarily
suited to everybody. Um and you know, I
could talk more about that, but I think
there are many ways to get there. They
can be a kind of good door opener. You
know, they kind of just smash the door
right off it hinges and show you the
other side. Or you could just kind of
open it a bit more gingerely perhaps by
getting into your dreams or lucid
dreaming, meditation, uh yoga practice,
whatever it might be. So there are other
there other techniques to get you there
as well which may be a bit more
controlled. But you know in this
fast-paced
21st century existence, a lot of people
have got themselves into a very sticky
rut for all kinds of reasons,
urbanization, 21st century living, etc.
I think they can be a a a good fasttrack
door opener for many people. Um but is
there a dark side? I think potentially
that there can be uh not just in how
these things are are distributed or
experienced but in terms of the
experience I think that's where you're
getting to uh Daniel in terms of the
experiences that people have or more
about the kind of community around the
use of psychedelics. are the experiences
that people have and even if you know
they can have negative negative you know
positive effects on people's character
but are there cases where they start to
have a very negative effect also? Yeah,
I mean I I certainly can do and it's
it's not all light and I think you know
I think you maybe have to look at it as
more of a process. I mean certainly from
the clinical work that's been done you
know very few people a lot of people may
have challenging experiences which you
know they're very difficult for them but
they usually pass through them and those
are the ones that typically give like a
lot of insight that people feel they
grow more from even though it wasn't
particularly pleasant and a very few
people have you know kind of somewhat in
the region of traumatic experiences and
and regret doing doing it in the first
place. So maybe either they're shouldn't
be taking psychedelics or psychedelics
are not necessary for them or they
started a process which which kind of a
process which which threw up too much
stuff for them to be able to immediately
deal with. Uh I haven't really got a
clear answer for that but um you know
that there can be heavy dark experiences
with psychedelics when you go into the
shadow when you turn up the volume on
the mirror you're not necessarily always
going to like what you see in there. So
uh yeah
and also the problems of spiritual
bypass and potential narcissism and
things like that which which kind of may
arise as part of the journey but this is
a part of any kind of like journey of
personal or spiritual development and
not just with psychedelics I would say.
I'll hand it over to Chris.
>> I completely agree with you that's uh
David that's there are dark experiences
that surface in these states and
therefore you have to be well prepared.
You have to fasten your seatelt. You
have to choose a very careful location.
Work with all all the safety
precautions. My experience has been that
uh all these dark experiences are some
form of purification and clarification.
And in my experiences, I found that the
deepest breakthroughs into ecstatic
knowledge, ecstatic knowing and
visionary knowing came after the deepest
purification dark experiences. So that
in my work I actually uh created the
conditions that would facilitate the
deepest and darkest encounters not
because I was a fond of suffering but
because I was fond of what took place on
the other side what lay on the other
side of that suffering but to do that
it's really important to take
psychedelics in a very very carefully
structured setting not in a recreational
setting not casually with a lot of
forethought and a lot of discipline,
preparation, not only going into the
session, but coming out of the session
for the integration process, for the
retention process, for the encoding, and
eventually um the debrief after your
session is over. And a good thorough
debrief is actually a very good way to
prevent problems that emerge in your
subsequent sessions.
So, it's very important.
Uh I guess Christopher or actually for
both of you a question for you is you
know what are what are things people can
do um to prepare how what's the best way
to prepare yourself for a psychedelic
experience? I mean how how do you
approach these uh these sessions uh you
know for yourself?
>> Well in the southwestern and in in the
hope Indians they have a ka right it's a
hole in the ground with a a circle in
the top and you climb down with a ladder
and then they pull up the ladder and
you're a completely isolated environment
for the duration of the entire
experience. And and I always think of my
work with psychedelics. I'm in a ka. I'm
in a place that's completely isolated,
protected. I'm with someone who's going
to take care of my body. I I'm not in a
talking relationship. I'm in an highly
internal engaged relationship. I want to
have clean contact. So I want to
eliminate all outside influences. Now,
it's wonderful sometimes to take
psychedelics and go into nature, and
that's a wonderful experience. But when
you're going deep into this this in
facing the personal and collective and
historical shadow
that work is best done I think in in
isolation. I do a lot of spiritual
practice before and after a session. I
take care of my body. I make sure my
body is well tuned and and relaxed and
and aligned before going into a session
because when you're running in
psychedelics, fairly high dose
psychedelics, your body is processing
enormous quantities of energy. It's
very, very demanding on your subtle
energy system. And if you haven't been
taking care of your subtle energy system
well before your session, you're going
to have more complications arising. So,
a lot of care for my body, a lot of care
for my subtle energy system, a lot of
spiritual practice beforehand, and then
a very careful and sustained debrief
after afterwards.
That's my approach.
>> And David,
>> uh, yeah, I mean, I guess it depends on
the your level of experience, the
context, what you hope to get from the
experience. So, um, but always, you
know, if you're inexperienced, do your
homework. Make sure you know what it is
you're taking. All the kind of basics,
you know, dosage, substance, purity,
where it come from, do you trust the
source, set and setting, you know, where
you are psychologically, physically with
it, preparation, and then integration
afterwards as as Chris pointed out, but
it needn't necessarily always be a 600 m
deep dive in Chris's process, which is
which is brilliant. uh but you know it
could be for instance we've experimented
with 100 m low doses uh with top level
scientists for creative insight uh
creative problem solving on technical
problems and now you know this seems to
be this is a completely different agenda
to a kind of completely deep
philosophical spiritual journey uh and
that kind of produced really good
results. So it all really depends on the
context of use but but you make sure you
pay attention to the context your
intentions setting and substance
preparation and integration.
>> David I know that uh England
particularly the Imperial College is now
kind of the center in a sense of the
sort of cutting edge of psychedelic um
kind of research. I wonder if you could
tell people uh kind of what's going on
there now. What what's what's active and
and what what types of discoveries are
are being made.
Uh so I'm kind of loosely affiliated to
Imperial College, the psycho research
center there. There haven't been too
much going on recently because of
lockdown. I think they're beginning to
resume kind of recruitment of uh of
participants for various studies, but
some of it is clinical. So they've been
looking at kind of psilocybin for
depression as part of a kind of uh a
kind of global endeavor to help get
psilocybin kind of licensed as as
medicicament for treating depression.
but also most of their focus is on the
kind of neuroscientific the
neuroscychopharmacological
research. So how do these substances
work in the brain and more importantly
what does it tell us about the nature of
consciousness from what we can discover
about how these uh substances work in
the brain. So some of the projects have
been you know they've done lots of
neuroiming of MDMA, psilocybin, LSD and
dimethylryptamine.
uh I'm working collaborating on the DMT
study. Uh we're looking to do kind of
slow infusion. So taking people into
kind of uh highdose breakthrough
experiences over extended periods of
time and both exploring the neuroscience
connected to that but also the kind of
the experience as well. So uh what comes
out of those experiences and one of the
things as a parasychologist I'm looking
to do with them there is explore uh kind
of shared visionary experiences for
instance can we get two people on DMT at
the same time in a kind of prolonged
state um in kind of side by side but
separated in different kind of rooms you
know so doing it at the same time and
and kind of look at their brain activity
see if there's any kind of correlation
which we wouldn't expect from if they
did it at different times but also in
the kind of experiences that people
have. Is there some corollery of the
experience that two people may have at
the same time
uh when with with the intention of
having a shared journey? I mean that
takes us into kind of some pretty far
out transpersonal realms. But uh yeah,
that's just a kind of a tip of the
iceberg of the stuff that's going on
there. They're doing a lot of really
great research and survey work too and
working with retreat centers and all
sorts.
Um,
I'm tempted to ask both of you just, it
may sound like a funny question, but
it's always on one's mind. Uh, from your
different personal psychedelic
explorations,
how do you what what's your philosophy
on what like the purpose of life is and
the purpose of argument experience?
>> No small question. Chris, you want to go
first?
>> Goodness, that's that is a large one.
Uh, hey, listen. The universe has been
unfolding for 13.7 or so billion years.
We don't see any evidence that it's
going to be stopping for another 13.7
year billion years. So I think all of
our attempts to say what the purpose of
life is will always be inadequate given
the enormity of the actual project of
life. What we can see, what we can
project, what we can extrapolate about
the purpose
may carry us a certain distance but it
won't take us through the entire
process. So to me uh central is learning
u loving deeply experiencing opening um
learning and exploring and developing uh
expanding our capacities
um exploring to me exploring is really
important. Um
the purpose one time I within a deep
encounter with this creative
intelligence this nameless faceless
intelligence that I was engaging and uh
the topic of what the purpose of
existence is what is it all and I was
popping in and out between non-being or
the pure void and suddenly being and and
by popping back and forth between being
the universe and non-being the primal
void out of which the universe sprang.
It really generated a question. What is
the purpose of being? What is the
purpose of existence? And this
consciousness said to me, have we not
learned anything?
And it just shattered me. I just broke
down and wept because and it just seemed
like it was all about learning. I don't
think there's an idea often that this
consciousness is trying to learn
something about itself. I I don't think
so so much that that doesn't persuade
me. But that learning is central to the
entire project. Seems to be really
important.
>> Okay, David, what you got for us?
>> Not that much. I mean, I guess the thing
is we are we are on a quest for meaning,
right? You know, what is the meaning of
the nature of the universe? It's like,
well, that's a human endeavor to to
establish meaning. You know, I'm not
sure all species necessarily try and try
and find the meaning, right? But we are
kind of lost in a way as well. You know
where we are. It's like uh I think our
our loss of meaning in a kind of
materialist reductionist universe has
has kind of led us into all kinds of
difficult places. So I think the quest
for meaning in itself is is a worthwhile
endeavor. But ultimately it may be not
say meaningless but pointless because it
might be just about the being as Chris
said that is kind of really the
important thing. Um, but I'm a bit
confused.
>> Um,
>> what do you think, Angel?
>> Um, that's a good question. I mean, um,
I think, yeah, learning, creativity, uh,
expression, play. Uh, I don't think
there's a necessity to it. And I do
think, you know, meaning itself is is a
human created term.
um you know dreaming, experiencing,
creating, discovering,
uh loving, you know, maybe multiple
purposes.
Um we had a few questions about the
value of micro doing uh and I was
curious if you had a perspective on on
do you see that as a as a really helpful
tool for people at this point in time?
>> Uh I guess that might be for me because
Chris seems to be bit more in the macro
dosing camp I would say.
the other end of the spectrum. Um I
think micro doing may have potential. I
don't think we have enough data yet. I
mean certainly there's a lot of kind of
uh uncontrolled data, you know, like
kind of from nonplacebo randomized
control studies from the scientific
perspective saying that people feel like
it's really beneficial for all kinds of
things for depression, insight,
creativity,
uh all of that kind of stuff.
uh there's very little research to say
those experiences or that kind of
outcome may be genuine. We don't know,
right? It could be one massive placebo
effect, but hey, if people think it's
beneficial, then then that's might be
good enough. Um I mean, again, most of
my research I I focus more on low to
high macro doing, right? So I think
there's potentially a room for for micro
doing um
there's some potentially dangers in it
and and I think and that is it's just
the kind of co-opting of of psychedelics
as as just kind of mere psycho vitamins
when they can do so much more right uh
uh fortunately from what I can gather
from the the research is a lot most
people who micro dose it invariably end
up accidentally macro dosing at some
point and uh usually get a surprise
And that might be beneficial.
>> Yeah, I leave that one in your hands,
David, because I personally don't have a
lot of experience with micro doing
because when I have tried micro doing uh
with LSD, it was after years and years
of working at these very high dose
levels. But basically, I found now that
I I really don't like LSD in my body. I
it's like I drove it so hard with these
massive doses for so many years that my
body developed kind of an allergy to it
and so it's just not good for me to use
now and I haven't used it for years. So
I don't have much experience on micro
doing. I read the literature and like
you there's a lot of anecdotal positive
literature uh but there isn't as much
scientific good solid literature on
micro doing. I'm sure it's coming along.
Uh and like you I also think of that
that's a good phrase uh uh what was it?
Psychedelic sort of psycho micro pill
vitamin pill. Uh it can do so much more.
Yeah.
>> Very cool. Later on in uh this uh
session we're going to have a
presentation from my friend Andrew
Kamargo who's been working very heavily
with Santo Da and the Iawaska tradition
for many many years. Uh, but I thought
first actually if he if he's up for it.
Oh, has he disappeared on me? Um,
I was going to see if if uh Jeremy
Johnson wanted to give us a little bit
of insight into the integral model. Um,
but he may have flown the coupe for a
second. Hey,
>> Daniel. Ah,
>> there you are, Jeremy. Okay, great. You
want to jump in and give us a 10-minute
kind of overview of Ger's integral
consciousness model?
>> Sure. Sure. Um,
>> this is Jeremy.
>> Yes. Yeah. Thank you, Daniel. Um, and,
uh, just been really enjoying today's
presentations already. Um, so some of
you may already be familiar with
integral theory. I know Rory has
mentioned spiral dynamics a number of
times in the context of like extinction,
rebellion, and so on. But um I think
when we're talking about the history of
consciousness, I think a lot of this
stuff can be very abstract and very
detached and we look at our own history,
our own living history from the distance
of books, right? Um so when it comes to
Gene Ger's work uh he's sort of these
foundational thinkers of integral theory
and Ken Wilbur but GPS is very very
different from Wilbur in the sense that
he's not a developmentalist per se and
if anyone has engaged with his his uh
writing on the topic his writing is
deeply phenomenological in that it's
always um encouraging us to explore and
inquire our own experience of
consciousness. We've been talking about
the left and the right brain with
McGillchrist and in many ways um GPS's
work is a kind of if you want to jump in
and begin to explore the left and the
right brain in your own phenomenology
then he's sort of a good guide book
towards that. Now a little bit of
background with me. I'm an integral
scholar and researcher. I've been
working with the Gene GPS society for uh
the past 10 years or so. uh planning to
get my PhD work um hopefully things go
well at uh CIS as well. So it's good to
see uh Christopher here um in the PCC
program. So yeah, GPS presents us with
uh a phenomenology of consciousness very
carefully looking at um basically a kind
of a a an archaeology of meaning making
looking at particular works of art,
forms of literature, the evolution of
language and etmology. um the meaning of
certain words and how even in our
language, right? Even in our language
has a kind of um uh how how to put it uh
a processual movement from what we're
talking about sort of nighttime or
sidereal dimensions of consciousness
into the waking. And he very carefully
constructs a kind of descriptive process
in which human consciousness has moved
from these sidereal nighttime magic and
mythical forms or structures into uh
waking appalonic discerning
ratiooriented as he says um uh sort of
the secular age so to speak. But there
are gains and losses in this, right? And
I think having a more nuanced and
nonlinear approach to this that is also
encouraging it encouraging us to explore
these modes of consciousness in
ourselves can really help us um make
these things concrete rather than
abstract and really kind of come become
to live the magic and the mythic again
rather than to merely acknowledge them,
right? to live in some capacity or have
some contact with uh these earlier modes
of consciousness. So for GPSer the the
challenge in our time is not so much to
move to a next level as to uh
presentiate and to open up the wealth
and the history of our consciousness. um
different modes of time, cyclical forms
of time and participatory cosmologies
bringing into contact that with the more
rational and scientific and secular
modes of thinking. And for GPS, the the
requirement for that isn't just to bring
those modes of consciousness back, but
to sort of facilitate and enable an
aquamus and open enough um what he calls
it is a the principle of diaphanity.
uh a clear enough conscious to allow
those different modes and structures to
presentiate themselves in us. And as a
kind of a too long didn't read uh uh um
micro dose of GPS, the idea for integral
consciousness is an intensification of
clarity and the capacity to bring forth
different modes of being in the world
and being in time including linear time,
timelessness, uh rhythmic time, right?
uh cyclical cosmologies etc. Bringing
all of those things forward in the human
being to bring them forward at will as
if we were a kind of mercurial being
that was both a living past and also
interestingly enough his theory of time
we've been talking a little bit about
tempor um transcending time and space.
His theory of integral consciousness to
me is very futuristic in a certain way
because it's talking about a way of
being in the present in which the
poetics of the present um is able to be
both
in the deep past and in the future. The
future is latent in the present as a
tangible experience and there's a
poetics of presence that we can engage
in that allows that to kind of come
forward. Yeah, somebody's mentioning
ancient future. This is what I'm writing
about in my next book called Fragments
of an Integral Futurism. Uh very much
this idea that a lot of the future looks
a lot like the past. And in some ways, a
poetic statement of this because it's
this is too short of a presentation to
really get into the theoretical details,
but a poetic statement of this would be
when we do an ancestor work, right? When
we are able to listen to the dead within
us, this is not an abstract thing. when
we are at our altars and we are working
with our ancestors they are present.
Gapser was very sensitive to that. Um
and I think his phenomenology of this
integral future is the capacity to
listen to the unborn as well somehow
that the the the long dead and the not
yet born are present in us and not as
just a conceptual statement but as a
living communion. Right? How can we live
like this in the present? And also how
can we embrace a sense of the present in
which past, present and future
intermingle with one another? And by
doing so, obviously, you know, I think
that would be a wonderful tool to to or
or mode of being an ontology to have
right now, right? Where the past,
present, and future are collapsing into
one another, right? um just in terms of
climate change and the modes of thinking
that ecological thought require of us.
It's an intensification of temporics and
I could get into all this other stuff
but I think that's
>> Daniel I think I I summed it up.
>> That was wonderful. Uh and uh we have uh
Joti is is is is coming on in a minute
because she only has a bit of time
today. But I did want to quickly talk
about the structures of consciousness
that Keepser mentions which I also
talked about in my book 2012 the return
of Kelqu. He he has this idea that there
are these I guess he identifies four
>> structures of consciousness and he talks
about how each one reaches a crisis in
in which the only way forward is to go
through a kind of mutation or
transmutational break into a new
structure of consciousness. I believe he
talks about the the aboriginal, the
archaic, uh the tribal or and the mental
rational. And he kind of would say that
we are at the at the end of this mental
rational structure. Yes. With this
particular way of conceiving time and
space and that we've reached a point
where the only way forward requires a
kind of mutational break into a new form
of consciousness. Maybe you want to um
you know kind of just just delve into
that for for a few minutes if you can.
>> Sure. Sure. Yeah. Sure. Sure. Um so yes
the context in which I read GPS about a
decade ago was he sets up his book and
again I was interested in integral
theory etc and interested in cultural
evolution but his whole the whole
premise and thesis of that book and his
work is that the 20th century and the
21st century he was a mid-century
thinker he was born in 1905 he died 1973
um is that we are at a civilizational
juncture point there is tremendous
destabilization and restructuration
He lived through obviously the first
half of the 20th century seeing that
firsthand. Um he was a European refugee
fleeing from one country to another
during that time. But he posits this as
the end of what he calls the mental
rational or perspectable age and the
opening up of the this integral uh
structure of consciousness. And he
basically said well hey look I'm in the
middle of a transformation. um there's
new arts, there's new sciences, there's
breakdowns of different modes of being
in the world, right? There's a
civilizational collapse happening. At
the same time, there's a civilizational
opening. So, Ger is a very key thinker
in this regard in that he both lived
through and was deeply sensitive and
articulate of exactly in my opinion um
some of the deep themes that we're
learning to let go of in terms of the
mental world, right? perspective world,
the modes of time, the relationship
between subject and object and
cartesianism is very much related to the
mental rational. So again, like if if
you want to really cohhere
the the culture that in some sense we
are being we are helping to die, right?
We are help we're assisting in its death
process. I think Epser is very helpful
here in that he was a poet and so he
really makes this something that we can
phenomenologically explore in ourselves
in terms of our own embodiment in
relation to time and space. Um, but yes,
there's there's a general overall
structure just really quick. Archaic,
magic, mythic, mental, integral. Um, and
each of these go through these leaps.
And I can go into this in some
>> Let's maybe come back to that later. Um,
and go into that because it's a really
great framing also for thinking about
some of the subjects that Christopher
and David were speaking about.